because of the system we had to deal
with right
which takes us back to that billion
dollars we were talking about before now
kerry
you did a phd on young female offenders
in 1989 we were talking just then about
how over the period of a decade
not there has been some improvement but
not very much how do the
figures today compared to what what you
were looking at
at that time okay well there's no
improvement over
several decades unfortunately my study
was a 1046
young female offenders um and over half
of them had been
what was called then state wards you
call them kids in care today
and um over over half of them
uh many of them disproportionately
indigenous like amy was
saying overpoliced um stolen from
indigenous families
there was a disproportionate indigenous
um and many of them
ended up with um long careers in the
criminal justice system
and it's what we call the fast track
from care to detention
and i noticed from this study today that
of the kids who were in residential care
who did this survey that's over half
had involvement with youth justice now
rezzy care kids
are in a very vulnerable position
because
when they're put in residential care
they're not treated as children
they're treated as as basically when
when um when the workers have problems
with them
there's a predisposition to just simply
call the police
uh and then the police come and charge
them and this is but no
this happened in in cases i examined um
30 odd years ago but um we've been doing
more recent research and we've found
exactly the same as happening and
occurring
now and there are serious problems in
the system where they just call the
police
instead of like if you were a normal
loving family you wouldn't call your
the police if you were having an
argument with a child and a child
threw a cup of tea at your um at the
wall or to smash something
well unfortunately when you're in
resident care and places like this
that's what happens and they get charged
with um
um assault and um um and protection and
sorry property offences so
it's easy it is as amy says the system
is
really flawed
today sydney's eastern suburbs coveted
cluster grows to nine
as masks are mandated indoors for seven
local government areas
it won't burden you unless we have to
but when we do ask you to do something
please do it as one local case puts
authorities on alerting queensland a
flight attendant tests positive
after completing 14 days quarantine
also ahead the government says taking
china to the wto over wine terrace will
initiate settlement consultations
back on the inside look at the speed he
stays alive
dancing dancing doing it all
and melbourne thrashed the tigers on the
sunshine coast reclaiming top spot
on the ladder
hello and welcome to abc news i'm miriam
corwin
sydney's eastern suburbs coronavirus
cluster has grown to nine
cases it comes as authorities impose an
immediate mask
mandate for indoor areas in seven local
government areas
for more details we're crossing now to
reporter randy heyman
rani what do we know about the latest
cases that have been reported
good afternoon well as you said there
the number of
cases linked to this eastern suburbs
cluster has now grown to nine
cases so we know that a man in his 30s
tested positive to
the virus and he was announced yesterday
he has been included in today's numbers
and we've now learnt that his household
contact
a woman has also tested positive to the
virus
so we understand that this couple
traveled to a number of venues not only
across sydney
but also down in wollongong and they
visited venues including the westfield
at bondi junction
and also a cafe in ferry meadow which is
just
north of wollongong now we also have
heard about two additional cases which
will be
included in tomorrow's reporting numbers
and that includes
a man and a woman both from the
sutherland shire aged in their 50s
they are both close contacts of a
previously
reported coronavirus case and they have
been in isolation
however new south wales health says
there may be additional venues that are
announced
as part of that couple now we know that
the
obviously the original source of this
coronavirus cluster was
a limousine driver new south wales
health says that
this limousine driver in his 60s uh
transported flight crews from to and
from sydney airport
he is believed to have the highly
infectious delta
virus strain and that has authorities
particularly concerned
given that it is highly transmissible
and it can be transmitted in close
proximity
to other people for instance just
walking past someone
it is possible to get the virus in that
way so here's a bit of what
the chief health officer dr kerry chant
had to say a bit earlier
the acquisitions probably occurred as
people are moving about
the westfield's bondi junction that does
give us cause for concern
because it means that we may not have
identified people if people are just
looking at particular venues
and therefore we want those high rates
of testing we have called out before
yesterday for people in a defined period
of time
but for simplicity in the message if
anyone has been there
on westfields at bondi junction
including the car park on june 12th
and 13th please get a test dr kerry
chant there and
rani they've extended now the mask
mandate
on public transport what are the details
right well now if you are traveling on
public transport
and you live in greater sydney the blue
mountains the illawarra or the shell
harbour areas you
are mandated to have to wear masks on
public transport
it's also mandatory at this point in
time to wear
public transport in all indoor spaces
in a number of local government areas
across greater sydney those areas
include the city of sydney waverly
randwick
canada bay inner west bayside walara
local government areas so the new south
wales health authorities have said that
that
may be extended further than at
the end of this week as they had
previously told us
here's a bit of what the premier
gladysburg jiglian had to say
at this stage we did not want to make
the decision to have compulsory indoor
mask wearing across all of greater
sydney but if the situation changes
overnight
that is an option that we will have to
consider but at this stage
we don't think we need to do any further
than what we've announced today but it
does mean
people have to be really active in
getting the information
to make sure that they're compliant and
compliance is so important
i know that all of us are a bit fatigued
after so many months of living with
covert
but we can't drop the ball now that is
very jiggling in there and ronnie what's
the word on testing numbers for today
so we heard today that there was roughly
500 tests that were conducted in the
latest reporting period and that's
slightly down on the number of tests
that were conducted
in the reporting period before that that
obviously has health authorities quite
concerned because they do want those
testing numbers to increase
we heard from the new south wales health
minister brad hazard yesterday who said
he wanted testing numbers to be between
40 000 to 50 000 tests per day we know
that new south wales has done that in
the past
we've reached up to 70 000 tests per day
during the northern beaches
outbreak so the main messaging from
health authorities at this point in time
is for people to continue coming forward
to get tested
as they've said this uh this virus
strain the delta strain is one of
particular concern
it can be transmitted by simply walking
past somebody so it is
quite important that people come forward
and get tested they say
ronnie heyman reporting there in sydney
queensland has recorded one new case of
covert 19
in the community the new infection is an
international flight crew member who
tested positive
after completing 14 days of quarantine
the queensland premier anastasia
palestine flagged the further easing of
restrictions
next week if the current situation is
kept under control
a number of exposure sites have been
identified but the premier says the risk
to the community
is low i don't want the community
to be alarmed at this stage because the
woman was
only out in the community for a short
period of time but there are some areas
of concern
especially dfo and also she attended
the portuguese family centre in ellen
grove
as you've just heard from the queensland
premier the state's new case visited a
number of venues while potentially
infectious
let's now take a look at them anyone who
visited the dfo at brisbane airport
between 4 and 4 30 pm yesterday needs to
isolate immediately
and contact queensland health the case
then went into the city between 5pm and
6pm
queensland's chief health officer is
asking anyone who was in the city
centre at that time to monitor for
symptoms in the next 14 days
and get tested if they emerge the
infected woman then traveled to brisbane
portuguese family centre
in ellen grove between 7 p.m and 7 50
p.m
anyone there at that time also needs to
immediately isolate
you can access this information and any
new exposure sites
if they emerge on the queensland health
website
tasmania's west coast relies on the
mining industry to survive
now one of the area's mainstay mines is
facing closure within
three years if it can't build a new dam
to dispose of its tailings
putting hundreds of jobs on the line the
preferred sites inside
the taikai a vast temperate rainforest
of outstanding
national heritage significance it
sparked a major standoff with
conservationists
the protesters arrived before dawn
blocking workers access to a disputed
part
of the tarkin
why put a poison into a rain forest
it just doesn't make sense to me farmer
and hobart businessman anthony houston's
protesting mmg's proposed new tailings
dam
he's arrested within a few hours one of
30 arrests in a month
the most important thing is to protect
what we've already got
and the tarkine is something really
special
the rosebury mine's been producing zinc
copper and lead concentrates for 85
years
it's already got two tailings dams and
both will reach capacity
in three years it wants to build a third
inside the tarkine without another dam
the mine will close well that'll
captioning not
minerals available and energy council
says
supply chains would unravel and disrupt
hobart's near star smelter
which relies on product from rosebury
for its operations
the proposed dam development has a
footprint of 285 hectares
inside mmg's existing mining lease it
would have a lifespan
of 42 years it's the most viable option
and that area has been earmarked for a
tailing stem for quite a number of years
many in the community want it to go
ahead it's got to keep going
you know how many jobs would go if if
the dam doesn't go in
all the jobs all these jobs will go the
trucks will go the mine certainly has a
lot more regulations
and restrictions that they have to
adhere to to make it more sustainable
and i don't think any of us can do
without our computers our laptops our
cars
all those things that mining gives us
the minerals for
if it's not going to come from tasmania
it'll come from somewhere else in the
world
the tarkine has been found to be of
outstanding national heritage
significance
but its environmental values haven't
been nationally protected
conservationists are also pushing for it
to be world heritage listed
the failure of our governments to to
make that listing
a reality has led to companies like mmg
coming here to plunder these
these beautiful areas
anna brozek has just returned from a
tree set at the proposed dam site
she says there's no room for compromise
it's a lot of mixed feelings when you're
in there because it's such a beautiful
experience
being surrounded by all this life and
at the same time heartbreaking because
we know
what these people want to do to that
place the dam
still needs a green light under federal
environment laws to proceed
here at south marion oak the time frame
for a decision on the next steps has
been pushed back
it's now due by the end of july whatever
the outcome
this fight is set to continue we don't
care if it's a tailings dam or a logging
operation if it's going to destroy this
area we're going to stand against it
caught between a rock and a hard place
alexandra humphries
abc news rosary
nearly 200 000 australians live in
residential aged care facilities
and most of us don't ever want to join
them the abc's australia talks national
survey
has also revealed an overwhelming belief
that our country doesn't have enough
respect for older australians
casey briggs has more on our anxieties
about aging
will you be able to afford to retire
comfortably according to the australia
talks survey only half of us have
any confidence that we will men are more
likely to say they'll have the money to
retire comfortably while
women lower income australians and
people with a disability
are more pessimistic regardless of our
personal situations nearly all of us
agree the ability to retire comfortably
is a problem
for australians and most of us about
two-thirds of australians
think that in this country we do not do
a good job respecting and taking care of
older citizens
you're more likely to think that if you
vote for a political party
on the left of the political spectrum
perhaps that perception is part of the
reason three-quarters of
us 76 of australians say they never
want to live in a nursing home that's
increased slightly since we asked this
question in 2019.
while nursing homes are not the
preferred destination in our old age it
looks like we've also got a long way to
go before
we can even view them as places we'd
feel comfortable
living in discuss this further we're
joined by
ralph hanson associate professor in
social work at the university of
melbourne welcome to
abc news firstly just over half of
all of those surveyed said they felt
confident they would have
enough money to retire comfortably but
that number can vary significantly
depending on age and also where someone
lives so
what do you think that signifies about
how australia is handling that shift
to being an aging older population
overall
i think what's really important miriam
is that when we think about
superannuation we need to think about
what we want to do in retirement
so there are often figures thrown around
like you need a million dollars a year
a million dollars invested in super
to have a good retirement but it really
does depend
on what you want to do in that
retirement so i think
planning for it is really important and
often people don't plan for
old age i think so really we have an
avoidance
of planning for this period of life
because for many others it generates
some fear and anxiety as your report
showed
that most people for instance don't want
to go to a nursing home uh
when it comes though to the
discrepancies that we continue to see
between men and women just for instance
but also for people with disability
how easy is it for people to actually
undertake that planning or should there
be
more assistance more support more input
to allow that planning to happen
i think there definitely does need to be
more input but
some of that is provided through
centrelink and other government services
if people want to use that
for their financial planning so i think
the thing i would say it's starting
early and not leaving until later
do you think though that there could be
more
i suppose of a push um around
particularly obviously when we've seen
the discussion
around the gap between men and women
with superannuation and whether these
women who tend to live
older does there need to be more done
there to help shore up
what is an ongoing prolonged issue
absolutely i think what's really
important there is that women
are often disadvantaged in
superannuation often because for the
generation of people
aging now women didn't work and are
dependent
on their uh partners superannuation
often
also we have an increasing problem of
women being homeless
in later life because of their lack of
financial
security when they were younger now you
mentioned there that perhaps a little
bit of avoidance is going on when it
comes to how people look at things like
retirement but also
interesting to note that some 76 of
people were saying that they don't want
to go
into a nursing home but the reality will
be quite different i'm sure
how can people best prepare themselves
for that reality
piers we have a bit of an issue there
with our connection with
ralph hampson who is associate professor
in social work
at the university of melbourne we'll
leave that interview
there for now but you can tune in to abc
tv at 8 pm local on monday to watch
annabelle crabb
and nazeem hussain take you through the
key findings of australia talks
china will have to front the independent
trade umpire with the australian
government taking beijing
to the world trade organization over
crippling wine tariffs
the terrorists brought the trade worth
more than 1 billion dollars last year to
a standstill
china accused australia's industry of
anti-competitive behaviour
which australia denies
what lodging the dispute enables us to
do is to begin
dispute settlement consultations that
actually is
a bilateral discussion with china about
the issues we've seen duties of over
200 applied to australian wine we don't
believe that that is consistent with
china's obligations uh under the wto
so that part of the process enables us
to have that
direct conversation the youngest
daughter of the billawilla family
has been released from hospital tanika
has been discharged from perth
children's hospital
it comes nearly two weeks since she was
medically evacuated from christmas
island with a blood infection
the tamil asylum seeker family has spent
the past three years fighting
deportation to sri lanka
earlier this week the government granted
the family a community detention order
thousands of people have turned out in
the polish capital of warsaw for the
region's biggest
pride march a highly visible and heavy
police presence
secured the parade's route there's been
growing hostility against
lgbt people in poland particularly from
the government
and the catholic church
back home elders and leaders from south
australia's remote community of yalata
have used a women's only school camp to
teach young people
about consent women's health and keeping
safe
it's a chance for women to learn
important lessons in a safe environment
from leaders with a wealth of knowledge
at school camp with yalata students
there are extra familiar faces
around the indoor campfire elders are
teaching bush medicine
and woodwork to their young women
activities that lead to more open
conversations smart is stepping forward
to help teachers and support services
drive home messages about consent and
what healthy relationships look like
looking at their faces the changes in
their faces they know
there is something has to happen all
over
australia in the remote communities and
in towns and cities
conversations around consent have spread
across the country this year
and these women hope to bring what
they've learned back to their community
do you think a lot of women in yellow to
know
um know about these things and they're
sharing
not really it's best for us to go and
share with them
teachers recognise the trust and respect
these women have for their community
leaders
to help them navigate sensitive and
important topics
the teachers here have facilitated kind
of the conversations and started them
but it's been wonderful to see the women
kind of just take over
in the event of domestic violence young
women are also
turning to their elders the sad part is
we're losing a lot of our young people
through domestic violence
and we want to stop this we need to
stand up now and
widely open our eyes and hears and our
hearts and work through these
problems that are happening to our
people strong women sharing
life-changing lessons
for generations to come evelyn leckey
abc news
porch lincoln we're going to take you
live now to melbourne where acting
premier or victoria james molino
is answering questions the state has
recorded no new local covert cases
overnight
trials will start later in this year
we'll have the results of those
in the first half of 2022
but the bottom line is we can never ever
be
in a situation where in the face of a
pandemic
we do not have local capability
in terms of developing vaccines we do
we do not ever want to be in a position
where we are
100 reliant on global supply
of vaccines and that's why today is such
a critical step forward
and to the team at monash university my
thanks and gratitude
for this important step i might ask the
minister for health
to go through some details further
details in terms of
covert and then i'll ask the minister
for medical research
to go into some further details about
these trials
martin i thank
thank you acting premier so
in terms of the current outbreak i just
wanted to bring victorians up to date
with some positive progress and some
further updates
so i can inform us that
the original city of whittlesea outbreak
we've now cleared 97
of the contacts associated uh with that
particular branch of the outbreak and
the same goes
with the cluster from port melbourne
which is also
at 97 rate of clearance
when it comes to the west melbourne
outbreak uh that was the
delta outbreak we're now at 98
of contacts having been cleared from
uh that particular cluster our care
maidstone
the aged care facility we're at 88
clearance uh and the reservoir family of
four
and their associated primary close
contacts and secretary contacts where
well down the path of 23
given that that was a more recent branch
so the important support and assistance
that we continue to provide
uh the south bank complex
and support that group of victorians
getting through their
quarantining is well underway and i want
to thank
that group for the extraordinary efforts
they're putting in
to keep all of us safe and it's a big
effort that we've asked
and we're committed to getting you
through this
uh particular journey i think it's
reasonable to expect
even though today was a zero day and we
always look to that
that given the numbers of people who are
coming up to their
uh 13-day tests that it's probable that
we'll still see
a few uh people turn positive
in that quarantining environment given
the numbers
that are still coming through the key
thing in that respect
is as those should that happen that
those cases
are in quarantine have no exposure sites
and we've got our arms wrapped around
them for support and get them through
this particular journey i want to also
advise that there are two
cases that are under investigation at
the moment
these are return travelers who are no
longer in quarantine
and who produced uh conflicting results
on different testing platforms uh over
the past 24 hours
the this is highly suggestive of
historical infections
and an expert review panel will be
convened later today
to consider those but our public health
teams in both cases
have taken serology work with
these two members of our community and
uh that
reinforces the notion that this points
to
uh historical infections uh before
these people arrived back in australia
there were some 19502 tests done
yesterday
that's passed uh seven more than seven
million tests
over the course of this pandemic in
victoria and as the acting premier said
particularly as we face challenges with
the vaccine roll out particularly as we
are in winter
the most important thing all of us can
do
is even with the slightest of symptoms
please come forward and get tested
as quickly as you can with over 200
testing sites
right around the state this is the most
important early warning system our
public health teams
our gps and others can have to make sure
we stay ahead of this virus particularly
given
that globally the delta variant seems to
be
the dominant uh strain of the variance
of concern
out there yesterday we returned 12
242 vaccines through our state-run
centers
bringing to almost 900 000
vaccines that we've delivered through
those state-run clinics
together with our partners in the gp
and primary healthcare networks and the
commonwealth's
delivery we're now almost at two million
vaccines here in victoria
and can i use this as an opportunity to
remind everyone
uh who are due their second dose of
pfizer given that we've
had a huge uh response over the last few
weeks
for people coming forward from 40 and
above
to pfizer and if you're falling due this
week
please come forward uh through the
booking systems
that we've had in place call if you've
yet to book
call the coronavirus hotline or hop on
to coronavirus.vic.gov
and make sure you get that second
booking there is
a suitable supply there now for those
second doses
and it's really important that you come
forward and get that
and that is where we will leave that
press conference you can continue to
watch it on the abc's
youtube channel that is the latest from
abc news i'm miriam coral at just
recapping though
the main story masks are now mandatory
indoors
across parts of sydney after the
coronavirus cluster in the eastern
suburbs grew to nine
cases thank you for your company
tonight jack sinks his teeth into a
difficult case
there's no evidence of foul play open
and shut suicide it's hardly top shelf
policing
revenge killings all new jack irish
tonight 8 30 on abc tv
or stream all episodes on iview this
week on news breakfast he's the man
behind hamilton now lin-manuel miranda
joins us is the screen version of in the
heights
wows audiences worldwide and more big
musical news the aussie production of
cinderella has just been cast we'll be
chatting to the stars
see you monday
the pm promised 20 million doses to
pacific nations as part of the global
plan
to deal with a pandemic if that role
like goes anything like ours most of the
pacific nations will be underwater by
the time we turn up to deny we ever
promise them anything in the first place
shawn mcauliffe's mad as hell wednesday
8 30 on abc tv
and streaming on eye view
i put some money to account
there is a reason actors date other
actors he's a famous actor i loved you
in the avengers
i wasn't in there and you're a little
rat nobody starstruck
starts wednesday at nine on abc tv or
stream it all on eye view
welcome to one plus one i'm courtney act
courtney sits down with
some truly intriguing change-makers it's
about using your voice and your platform
for you more than just yourself
i want to change people's lives what
inspires us i like making people laugh
what challenges us i don't look like the
stereotypical black blackfall
and what connects us i'm pansexual
insane
young people have fresh ideas fresh
perspectives i'm still learning every
day
courtney acts one plus one starts monday
june 28 on abc
and iview
[Music]
hello i'm rachel papasoni welcome to
close of business
coming up on the program super scare
many of us worry about
not having enough to retire on but
what's driving that fear
the superannuation system makes money
from people putting money in
so they're going to always say you need
more money and of course that's creating
the anxiety
and nearly two-thirds of australians
think home ownership won't be an option
for young people
i definitely feel for the generation
because it's uh behind me because it's
it seems to be that
it gets harder for every generation also
on the program
we break down the basics of bitcoin
but first australia's jobs recovery has
again beaten expectations
unemployment has fallen for the seventh
consecutive month
to pre-pandemic levels more than
jobs were created in may the demand for
workers
is now leading to labor shortages
[Music]
jared fitz clarence's engineering and
manufacturing company in karatha in
western australia
is in expansion mode david he is one of
our first year apprentices
david's just started with us earlier
this year
when global supply chains were disrupted
by covert last year
the big mining and logistics companies
in the pilbara
sent their business his way this year
we're sitting at about 2
600 projects so far this calendar year
since beginning in january while he's
excited to have the extra work
finding enough staff is proving
difficult we've got about 14 vacancies
we've got a lot more work than we can
viably do and we're in a situation now
we're actually bringing in staff